2nd iteration of the process (#13)
kubevirt/enhancements: README.md

2. **VEP Creation**: VEP authors will initiate proposals via PRs to the `kubevirt/enhancements` repository.
   See the [VEP template](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/NNNN-vep-template/vep.md),
   each section needs to be filled even if the section doesn't apply to the VEP.

3. **SIG Review and Collaboration**: Although each VEP can have multiple target SIGs, it needs to have a single owning SIG.
   In case of a cross SIG feature, the most relevant SIG should be chosen.
   The owning SIG will ultimately decide if the VEP is accepted and whether it should be tracked for the upcoming release.  
   If so, the SIG will assign dedicated reviewers to oversee the proposal, collaborate with others SIGs as needed, and provide 
   feedback or veto when necessary. The author and reviewers work towards merged VEP.

   Each SIG (Compute, Network, Storage) should sign-off on the VEP with an LGTM from a SIG representative (chair or approver), 
   even if the proposal doesn't affect them. The sign-off works here as acknowledgment of the changes.

4. **Centralized Prioritization**: At the start of each release cycle, all accepted VEPs will be designated as the

>    project’s priority, focusing community efforts on the associated pull requests. Acceptance will be based on community
>    support and a commitment to implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   project’s priority, focusing community efforts on the associated pull requests. Acceptance will be based on community
   support for the VEP and a commitment from the VEP owner to implement the work before Code Freeze.
```
I know that we clarify this lower down in the note, but I think it's important to make it clear here as well - which hopefully this suggestion does :)

The following deadlines are important for the VEP:

1. VEP planning - at the beginning of every release cycle, each SIG would prioritize VEPs and decide which ones are being tracked for the upcoming release.
2. Enhancement Freeze - The deadline for this milestone is Alpha release of KubeVirt. See [kubevrirt/sig-release](https://github.com/kubevirt/sig-release/releases)
3. Code Freeze - This is tracked by each release [kubevrirt/sig-release](https://github.com/kubevirt/sig-release/releases)

## Implementation Phases

1. **Alpha Rollout (v1.5 Cycle)**:
    - [x] Create the `kubevirt/enhancements` repository.
    - [x] Introduce a template for VEP submissions.
    - [x] Migrate one or two active designs to test the process.
    - [ ] Refine the process based on feedback from initial VEPs.
2. **Full Rollout (v1.6 Cycle)**:
    - [ ] Transition all enhancements to the new process.
    - [ ] Empower SIGs to take increased ownership while maintaining central prioritization.
3. **Future Considerations**:
    - [ ] Gradual reduction in centralized coordination as SIGs become self-sufficient.

## Exceptions

> Exceptions are serving for any edge case that is not specified in this document, by release team/repository or within
> KubeVirt repository.
> Typically, an exception would be asked to allow contributors to continue to working on VEP/PRs/code after the EF or CF
> respectively.
> Exceptions can be asked before actual EF/CF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Exceptions are served for any edge case that is not specified in this document, by the release team/repository or within the
KubeVirt repository.
Typically, an exception would be asked to allow contributors to continue to working on VEP/PRs/code after the EF or CF
respectively.
Exceptions can be asked before the actual EF/CF.
```
A couple of nits

**How to ask for exception?**

> Exception will be sent to kubevirt-dev mailing list, the following should not be missing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A request for exception must be sent to the [kubevirt-dev](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/kubevirt-dev) mailing list, the following should not be missing:
```

# KubeVirt Enhancements Tracking and Backlog

This repository is used to manage KubeVirt Enhancement Proposals (
VEPs), emphasizing centralized prioritization and enhanced SIG involvement and collaboration.

## WHY

The process aims to focus the community's efforts on prioritized pull requests, increase the review bandwidth, and
ensure clear visibility of feature progress and associated issues. The relatively new split into SIGs requires defining
a common process to ensure synchronization between SIGs and uniformity of the project.

**Glossary**

- VEP: Virtualization Enhancement Proposal
- EF: Enhancement Freeze
- CF: Code Freeze
- RC: Release Candidate

## Process

1. **VEP Creation**: VEP authors will initiate proposals via PRs to the `kubevirt/enhancements` repository. 
   See the [VEP template](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/NNNN-vep-template/vep.md), 
   each section needs to be filled even if the section doesn't apply to the VEP.

> 2. **Visibility and Tracking**: The Author of VEP will open an issue to track their progress, maturity stages (alpha,

Reviewer 2: From my understanding, the issue tracker is created alongside the original VEP, since it also contain the timeline.

> 2. **Visibility and Tracking**: The Author of VEP will open an issue to track their progress, maturity stages (alpha,

Reviewer 2: @vladikr keep me honest here

> 2. **Visibility and Tracking**: The Author of VEP will open an issue to track their progress, maturity stages (alpha,

Reviewer 3: Yes, absolutely. We need the issue alongside the VEP. Initially, I also didn't think we needed it until the VEP is actually merged, but then when we started to track VEPs and attempted to automate this process it became clear that both are needed. Also, there could be PRs in the enhancement repository that are not VEPs. It's better to have the tracker together with the VEP.

> 2. **Visibility and Tracking**: The Author of VEP will open an issue to track their progress, maturity stages (alpha,

Reviewer 4: Thinking about it, @fossedihelm what do you think about moving it to be the first step? I think it would be important for educational purposes and would make it easier to understand the main idea.

> 2. **Visibility and Tracking**: The Author of VEP will open an issue to track their progress, maturity stages (alpha,

Reviewer 2: @iholder101 I am not sure! I would be a little more cautious, requiring at least the VEP before starting tracking it.
From this POV, it makes sense having the `VEP Creation` before the `Traker Creation`. WDYT?
We can review this, in case, in another refinement cycle.

> 2. **Visibility and Tracking**: The Author of VEP will open an issue to track their progress, maturity stages (alpha,

Reviewer 2: Done!

   beta, GA), list the associated bugs, and user feedback.
   See the [VEP issue template](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/vep.md), 
   each section should be filled.

3. **SIG Review and Collaboration**: Although each VEP can have multiple target SIGs, it needs to have a single owning SIG.
   In case of a cross SIG feature, the most relevant SIG should be chosen.
   The SIG will decide if the VEP is accepted and whether it should be tracked for the upcoming release. 
   If so, the SIG will assign dedicated reviewers to oversee the proposal, collaborate with others SIGs as needed, and provide 
   feedback or veto when necessary. The author and reviewers work towards merged VEP.

   Each SIG (Compute, Network, Storage) should sign-off on the VEP with an LGTM from a SIG representative (chair or approver), 
   even if the proposal doesn't affect them. The sign-off works here as acknowledgment of the changes.

4. **Centralized Prioritization**: At the start of each release cycle, all accepted VEPs will be designated as the

>    project’s priority, focusing community efforts on the associated pull requests. Acceptance will be based on community

Reviewer 2: Correct

   support and a commitment to implementation.

    - On the EF, approved VEPs will be announced to kubevirt-dev mailing list in order to draw attention to them.
    - Each week a release team will check tracked VEP in order to assure activity.

> 5. **Single source of truth**: Each VEP will be the authoritative reference for the associated feature. This aligns with

Reviewer: Is it worth explicitly stating that this involves the VEP being updated as the feature progresses?

Reviewer 2: I am not sure it's worth it

   the Kubernetes KEP process. It will ensure that each enhancement includes all the relevant information, including the
   design and the state.

### Responsibilities

#### VEP Owner

The VEP owner is responsible to update it as its development progresses, until it is fully mature (or deprecated).

> In addition, they are encouraged:
> 
> - talk about the design in the unconference sessions to bring everyone on the same page about the problem, 
>   use-cases/design etc...
> - join the relevant sig calls for further discussions, and seeking for reviews.
> - ask for reviews on community calls if this is a cross-sig VEP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, they are encouraged to do the following:

- Talk about the design in the unconference sessions to bring everyone on the same page about the problem, 
  use-cases/design etc...
- Join the relevant SIG calls for further discussions, and when seeking reviews.
- Ask for reviews on community calls if this is a cross-SIG VEP.
```

#### SIGs

> The responsibility of the SIGs is to do their best to help ensure sure the VEP is implemented, not diverging and that the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The responsibility of the SIGs is to do their best to help ensure sure the VEP is implemented, not diverging, and that the 
```

implementation is not lacking behind the VEP, following this non-exhaustive list meant as checklist:

1. After Code Freeze, SIGs need to go over a tracking issue and perform the following checklist:
   1. All PRs are merged into release branch
   2. Docs PR is merged (plan review ahead of release if only placeholder is opened)
   3. Verify that the Enhancement was implemented and doesn't need any update or exception
   4. Track any bugs
   5. Make sure the VEP's issue is tracking required PRs and Issues
2. Weekly check-in on progress of the Enhancement and its implementation
3. Coordinate SIGs, reviewers and approvers in order to progress the Enhancement

### Release check-ins
Both the release team and approvers of the VEPs are responsible for weekly check-ins, the outcomes of which will be posted on 
the VEP's tracking issue. The following are the goals of the
check-ins:

> 1. Re-targeting of VEP - In case of implementation not converging, new blockers being discovered, pushback of community
>    or withdrawal of an approver the VEP needs to be re-targeted. The VEP needs to be updated with a new target. The SIGs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Re-targeting of VEP - In case of implementation not converging, new blockers being discovered, pushback of community.
   or withdrawal of an approver, the VEP may need to be re-targeted to a different release. In this case, the VEP needs to be updated with the new target and the SIGs
```
Maybe?

   should shift the focus on tracked VEPs.
   Re-targeting could also be rejection of the VEP completely in case it is not implementable.

2. Coordination - SIGs are responsible to ensure reviews are not lagging behind by more than a week. 
   The release team makes sure there is always an active SIG representative.

### Labels

For easier management of the release and VEPs the following labels will be used:
1. SIG labels - Each SIG will have a label in order to sort which SIG is responsible for the VEP.
2. Target labels - There will be a label in order to target the VEP for release.

> ---
> **NOTE**
> 
> Acceptance of an enhancement doesn't guarantee that the feature will land in the current or later release. The process is
> collaborative effort between contributors and approvers. Features not landing in the release branch prior to CF will need
> to file for an exception, see [Exceptions](#Exceptions)
> 
> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> Acceptance of an enhancement doesn't guarantee that the feature will land in the current or later release.
> The process is collaborative effort between contributors and approvers.
> Features not landing in the release branch prior to CF will need to file for an exception, 
> see [Exceptions](#Exceptions)
```
Let's use the github md admonition format to make it pop

## Deadlines

The particular deadlines are always changing based on the release and are published here: [kubevrirt/sig-release](https://github.com/kubevirt/sig-release).  
The following deadlines are important for the VEP:

1. VEP planning - at the beginning of every release cycle, each SIG would prioritize VEPs and decide which ones are being tracked for the upcoming release.
2. Enhancement Freeze - The deadline for this milestone is Alpha release of KubeVirt. See [kubevrirt/sig-release](https://github.com/kubevirt/sig-release/releases)
3. Code Freeze - This is tracked by each release [kubevrirt/sig-release](https://github.com/kubevirt/sig-release/releases)

## Implementation Phases

1. **Alpha Rollout (v1.5 Cycle)**:
    - [x] Create the `kubevirt/enhancements` repository.
    - [x] Introduce a template for VEP submissions.
    - [x] Migrate one or two active designs to test the process.

>     - [ ] Refine the process based on feedback from initial VEPs.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to leave this for another refinement cycle. WDYT?

# KubeVirt Enhancements Tracking and Backlog

> This repository is currently Work In Progress but will eventually be used to manage KubeVirt Enhancement Proposals (

Reviewer 4: I'd avoid mentioning that this is work-in-progress.
de-facto, old design proposals are deprecated. It's true that we don't officially commit to VEPs yet, but a new user should definitely pick it over the old design proposals.

Reviewer 3: I agree

VEPs), emphasizing centralized prioritization and enhanced SIG involvement and collaboration.

## WHY

The process aims to focus the community's efforts on prioritized pull requests, increase the review bandwidth, and
ensure clear visibility of feature progress and associated issues. The relatively new split into SIGs requires defining
a common process to ensure synchronization between SIGs and uniformity of the project.

**Glossary**

> - VEP

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- VEP: Virtualization Enhancement Proposal
```

Reviewer 2: done

- EF: Enhancement Freeze
- CF: Code Freeze
- RC: Release Candidate
- Alpha/Beta

> - release team

Reviewer 4: Can we remove these? Or do we want to explain their meaning?

Reviewer 2: done

> ## Process (DRAFT 2nd iteration)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Process
```

1. **VEP Creation**: VEP authors will initiate proposals via PRs to the `kubevirt/enhancements` repository. 
   See the [VEP template](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/NNNN-vep-template/vep.md), 
   each section needs to be filled even if the section doesn't apply to the VEP.

2. **Visibility and Tracking**: The Author of VEP will open an issue to track their progress, maturity stages (alpha,
   beta, GA), list the associated bugs, and user feedback.
   See the [VEP issue template](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/vep.md), 
   each section should be filled.

> 3. **SIG Review and Collaboration**: Each VEP will have one target SIG. In case of a cross SIG feature, the most relevant 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. **SIG Review and Collaboration**: Although each VEP can have multiple target SIGs, it needs to have a single owning SIG. In case of a cross SIG feature, the most relevant 
```

   project’s priority, focusing community efforts on the associated pull requests. Acceptance will be based on community
   support and a commitment to implementation.

    - On the EF, approved VEPs will be announced to kubevirt-dev mailing list in order to draw attention to them.
    - Each week a release team will check tracked VEP in order to assure activity.

5. **Single source of truth**: Each VEP will be the authoritative reference for the associated feature. This aligns with
   the Kubernetes KEP process. It will ensure that each enhancement includes all the relevant information, including the
   design and the state.

### Responsibilities

#### VEP Owner

The VEP owner is responsible to update it as its development progresses, until it is fully mature (or deprecated).
In addition, they are encouraged:

- talk about the design in the unconference sessions to bring everyone on the same page about the problem, 
  use-cases/design etc...
- join the relevant sig calls for further discussions, and seeking for reviews.
- ask for reviews on community calls if this is a cross-sig VEP.

#### SIGs

> The responsibility of the SIGs is to make sure the VEP is implemented, not diverging and that the implementation 
> is not lacking behind the VEP, following this non-exhaustive list meant as checklist:

Reviewer 4: To emphasize that the SIG is not responsible that the VEP is implemented but is committed to help the VEP owner to do so.

```suggestion
The responsibility of the SIGs is to do their best to help ensure the VEP is implemented, not diverging and that the implementation 
is not lacking behind the VEP, following this non-exhaustive list meant as checklist:
```

### Labels

For easier management of the release and VEPs the following labels will be used:
1. SIG labels - Each SIG will have a label in order to sort which SIG is responsible for the VEP.
2. Target labels - There will be a label in order to target the VEP for release.

---
**NOTE**

Acceptance of an enhancement doesn't guarantee that the feature will land in the current or later release. The process is
collaborative effort between contributors and approvers. Features not landing in the release branch prior to CF will need
to file for an exception, see [Exceptions](#Exceptions)

---

## Deadlines

The particular deadlines are always changing based on the release and are published here: [kubevrirt/sig-release](https://github.com/kubevirt/sig-release).  
The following deadlines are important for the VEP:

1. VEP planning - at the beginning of every release cycle, each SIG would prioritize VEPs and decide which ones are being tracked for the upcoming release.
2. Enhancement Freeze - The deadline for this milestone is Alpha release of KubeVirt. See [kubevrirt/sig-release](https://github.com/kubevirt/sig-release/releases)

> 3. Code Freeze - This is tracked by each release [kubevrirt/sig-release](https://github.com/kubevirt/sig-release/releases)

Reviewer 4: Awesome! :tada: 
for the record: k8s have docs freeze and tests freeze, but I'm not sure we need those.

Reviewer 2: For sure, we don't need them currently. :)

This repository is currently Work In Progress but will eventually be used to manage KubeVirt Enhancement Proposals (VEPs), emphasizing centralized prioritization and enhanced SIG involvement and collaboration.

> **WHY**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### WHY
```

Reviewer 4: Good catch @dankenigsberg! though I think it should be `##` (double, not triple :smile:)

> The process aims to focus the community's efforts on prioritized pull requests, increase the review bandwidth, and ensure clear visibility of feature progress and associated issues. The relativly new split into SIGs requries defining common process to ensure synchronization between SIGs and uniformity of the project.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The process aims to focus the community's efforts on prioritized pull requests, increase the review bandwidth, and ensure clear visibility of feature progress and associated issues. The relatively new split into SIGs requires defining a common process to ensure synchronization between SIGs and uniformity of the project.
```

> The process aims to focus the community's efforts on prioritized pull requests, increase the review bandwidth, and ensure clear visibility of feature progress and associated issues. The relativly new split into SIGs requries defining common process to ensure synchronization between SIGs and uniformity of the project.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The process aims to focus the community's efforts on prioritized pull requests, increase the review bandwidth, and ensure clear visibility of feature progress and associated issues. The relativly new split into SIGs requires defining a common process to ensure synchronization between SIGs and uniformity of the project.
```

**Glossary**
- VEP

> - EF

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- EF: Enhancement Freeze
```
etc

- FF
- RC
- Alpha/Beta
- release team

## Process (DRAFT 2nd iteration)

> 1. **VEP Creation**: VEP authors will initiate proposals via PRs to the `kubevirt/enhancements` repository. See what is required for every VEP - [Design proposal template](https://github.com/kubevirt/community/blob/main/design-proposals/proposal-template.md), each section needs to be filled even if the section doesn't apply to the VEP. 

Reviewer 6: How do you fill a section that doesn't apply? Also:
```suggestion
1. **VEP Creation**: VEP authors will initiate proposals via PRs to the `kubevirt/enhancements` repository. See the [VEP template](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/NNNN-vep-template/vep.md), each section needs to be filled even if the section doesn't apply to the VEP. 
```

2. **Visibility and Tracking**: The Author of VEP will open an issue to track their progress, maturity stages (alpha, beta, GA), list the associated bugs, and user feedback. 

> See what is required for every VEP's issue [Issue template](https://github.com/kubevirt/community/blob/main/design-proposals/proposal-template.md), each section should be filled.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
See the [VEP issue template](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/vep.md), each section should be filled.
```

> 3. **SIG Review and Collaboration**: Each VEP will have a target SIG or more in case of cross SIG feature, and the SIGs will assign a dedicated reviewer to oversee the proposal, collaborate with others SIGs as needed, and provide feedback or veto when necessary. The author and reviewers work towards merged VEP.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
3. **SIG Review and Collaboration**: Each VEP will have one target SIG or more in case of a cross SIG feature, and the SIGs will assign a dedicated reviewer to oversee the proposal, collaborate with others SIGs as needed, and provide feedback or veto when necessary. The author and reviewers work towards merged VEP.
```

> Each SIG (Compute, Network, Storage) should sign-off the VEP with LGTM from representative (Sig-chair or approver of the sig) even if the proposal doesn't affect them. The sign-off works here as acknowledgment of the changes. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Each SIG (Compute, Network, Storage) should sign-off on the VEP with an LGTM from a SIG representative (chair or approver), even if the proposal doesn't affect them. The sign-off works here as acknowledgment of the changes. 
```

> Each SIG (Compute, Network, Storage) should sign-off the VEP with LGTM from representative (Sig-chair or approver of the sig) even if the proposal doesn't affect them. The sign-off works here as acknowledgment of the changes. 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Each SIG (Compute, Network, Storage) should sign-off the VEP with LGTM from a representative (Sig-chair or approver of the sig) even if the proposal doesn't affect them. The sign-off works here as acknowledgment of the changes. 
```

5. **Single source of truth**: Each VEP will be the authoritative reference for the associated feature. This aligns with the Kubernetes KEP process. It will ensure that each enhancement includes all the relevant information, including the design and the state.

The VEP owner is responsible to update it as its development progresses, until it is fully mature (or deprecated). 

The resposiblity of Approver is to make sure the VEP is implemented, not divering and implementation is not lacking behind VEP, following is nonexhaustive list meant as checklist:
1. After Feature Freeze, approvers needs to go over issue and perform the following checklist
   1. All PRs are merged into release branch
   2. Docs PR is merged (plan review ahead of release if only placeholder is opened)
   3. Verify that Enhancement was implemented and doesn't need any update or exception
   4. Track any bugs
   5. Make sure the VEP's issue is tracking required PRs and Issues
2. Weekly check-in on progress of Enhancement and its implementation
3. Coordinate sigs, reviewers and approvers in order to progress the Enhancement

**Release check-ins**

> Both the release team and approvers of the VEPs are responsible for weekly check-ins. The following are the goals of the check-ins:

Reviewer 4: +1. comment on the tracking issue is also what k8s are doing.

1. Re-targeting of VEP - In case of implementation not converging, new blockers being discovered, pushback of community or withdrawal of approver the VEP needs to be re-targeted. The VEP needs to be updated with new target. The SIGs should shift the focus on tracked VEPs. 

> Re-targeting could be also rejection of the VEP completly in case it is not implentable.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Re-targeting could be also rejection of the VEP completely in case it is not implementable.
```

> 2. Coordination - SIGs are responsible that the reviews are not lacking behind for more than week. Release team is making sure there is an active SIG representative.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
2. Coordination - SIGs are responsible to ensure reviews are not lagging behind by more than a week. The release team makes sure there is always an active SIG representative.
```

> **Labels**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Labels
```
better use linkable md headers over manual formatting for subsections of the text.

> For easier managment of the release and VEPs the following labels will be used:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For easier management of the release and VEPs, the following labels will be used:
```

> 1. SIG labels - Each SIG will have a label in order to sort what SIGs is responsible for the VEP.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. SIG labels - Each SIG will have a label in order to sort which SIG is responsible for the VEP.
```

> 2. Target labels - There will be a lable in order to target the VEP for release.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
2. Target labels - There will be a label in order to target the VEP for release.
```

**NOTE**

> Acceptance of enhancement doesn't guarantee that the feature will land in the current or later release. The process is collaborative effort between contributor/s and Approvers. Features not landing to release branch prior to FF will need to file for excepion, see <TODO>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Acceptance of enhancement doesn't guarantee that the feature will land in the current or later release. The process is a collaborative effort between contributors and approvers. Features not landing in the release branch prior to FF will need to file for an exception, see <TODO>
```

## Deadlines

> The particular dealines are always changing based on the release and are publish <Link to repo>. The following deadlines are important for the VEP:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The particular dealines are always changing based on the release and are published <Link to repo>. The following deadlines are important for the VEP:
```

1. Enhancement Freeze - The deadline for this milestone is Alpha release of KubeVirt. See <TODO link to release repo>
2. Feature Freeze - This is tracked by each release <TODO link to release repo>

## Implementation Phases

1. **Alpha Rollout (v1.5 Cycle)**:
   - [x] Create the `kubevirt/enhancements` repository.
   - [x] Introduce a template for VEP submissions.
   - [x] Migrate one or two active designs to test the process.
   - [ ] Refine the process based on feedback from initial VEPs.
2. **Full Rollout (v1.6 Cycle)**:
   - [ ] Transition all enhancements to the new process.
   - [ ] Empower SIGs to take increased ownership while maintaining central prioritization.
3. **Future Considerations**:
   - [ ] Gradual reduction in centralized coordination as SIGs become self-sufficient.

## Exceptions
Exceptions are serving for any edge case that is not specified in this documment, by release team/repository or within KubeVirt repository. 

> Typically an exeption would be asked to allow contributors to continue to working on VEP/PRs/code after the EF or FF respectivly.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Typically an exception would be asked to allow contributors to continue to working on VEP/PRs/code after the EF or FF respectively.
```

**WHY**
The process aims to focus the community's efforts on prioritized pull requests, increase the review bandwidth, and ensure clear visibility of feature progress and associated issues. The relativly new split into SIGs requries defining common process to ensure synchronization between SIGs and uniformity of the project.

**Glossary**
- VEP
- EF
- FF
- RC
- Alpha/Beta
- release team

## Process (DRAFT 2nd iteration)

1. **VEP Creation**: VEP authors will initiate proposals via PRs to the `kubevirt/enhancements` repository. See what is required for every VEP - [Design proposal template](https://github.com/kubevirt/community/blob/main/design-proposals/proposal-template.md), each section needs to be filled even if the section doesn't apply to the VEP. 

2. **Visibility and Tracking**: The Author of VEP will open an issue to track their progress, maturity stages (alpha, beta, GA), list the associated bugs, and user feedback. 
See what is required for every VEP's issue [Issue template](https://github.com/kubevirt/community/blob/main/design-proposals/proposal-template.md), each section should be filled.

> 3. **SIG Review and Collaboration**: Each VEP will have a target SIG or more in case of cross SIG feature, and the SIGs will assign a dedicated reviewer to oversee the proposal, collaborate with others SIGs as needed, and provide feedback or veto when necessary. The author and reviewers work towards merged VEP.

Reviewer 4: a few thoughts:
1. Even though the VEP can be related to multiple SIGs, there should always be a single owning SIG.
2. `and the SIGs will assign a dedicated reviewer to oversee the proposal`: I'd emphasize that the SIG is not obligated to assign reviewers/approvers, it's a matter of priority and acceptance of the VEP by the community. Would phrase it something like "the SIG will decide if the VEP is accepted and whether it should be tracked for the upcoming release. If so, the SIG will assign dedicated reviewers...".
3. `collaborate with others SIGs as needed`: I think that should be the VEP owner's responsibility above all, as written in another comment.

Each SIG (Compute, Network, Storage) should sign-off the VEP with LGTM from representative (Sig-chair or approver of the sig) even if the proposal doesn't affect them. The sign-off works here as acknowledgment of the changes. 

> 4. **Centralized Prioritization**: At the start of each release cycle, all accepted VEPs will be designated as the project’s priority, focusing community efforts on the associated pull requests. Acceptance will be based on community support and a commitment to implementation.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure this step is necessary, but if it is, I think it should be temporary, and we should state it would be removed when the process matures. IMO eventually (or, even now?) SIGs should have the sovereignty to prioritize VEPs on their own.

1. After Feature Freeze, approvers needs to go over issue and perform the following checklist
   1. All PRs are merged into release branch
   2. Docs PR is merged (plan review ahead of release if only placeholder is opened)
   3. Verify that Enhancement was implemented and doesn't need any update or exception
   4. Track any bugs
   5. Make sure the VEP's issue is tracking required PRs and Issues
2. Weekly check-in on progress of Enhancement and its implementation
3. Coordinate sigs, reviewers and approvers in order to progress the Enhancement

**Release check-ins**
Both the release team and approvers of the VEPs are responsible for weekly check-ins. The following are the goals of the check-ins:
1. Re-targeting of VEP - In case of implementation not converging, new blockers being discovered, pushback of community or withdrawal of approver the VEP needs to be re-targeted. The VEP needs to be updated with new target. The SIGs should shift the focus on tracked VEPs. 
Re-targeting could be also rejection of the VEP completly in case it is not implentable.

> 2. Coordination - SIGs are responsible that the reviews are not lacking behind for more than week. Release team is making sure there is an active SIG representative.

Reviewer 4: I'd remove the 1 week deadline and keep things a bit more vague.

```suggestion
2. Coordination - SIGs are responsible that the reviews are not lacking behind. Release team is making sure there is an active SIG representative.
```

**Labels**
For easier managment of the release and VEPs the following labels will be used:

1. SIG labels - Each SIG will have a label in order to sort what SIGs is responsible for the VEP.

> 2. Target labels - There will be a lable in order to target the VEP for release.

Reviewer 4: Can we list some examples? Such as:
`/sig compute`
`/tracked no`
`/target alpha`

(I hope these are correct. maybe @dhiller can keep me honest)

Reviewer 8: The labels are all controlled via the prow `label` plugin.

Snippet from docs:
```
Labels of the following types can be manipulated: 'area/*',
'committee/*', 'kind/*', 'language/*', 'priority/*', 'sig/*',
'triage/*', and 'wg/*'.
```

leading to

- `/sig compute`
- `/kind tracker` (depends on whether the kind/tracker label is availalbe, see [`labels.md` from l/project-infra](https://github.com/kubevirt/project-infra/blob/main/docs/labels.md))

What we need to do for custom labels like `tracked/...` and `target/...` is to create them in `k/project-infra`'s `labels.yaml` and configure them to be usable in the labels plugin so that a defined group of people can use them. FYI - here's what [labels kubernetes has](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/b0237bfe7dbfde41165513de75f51c26861c4b32/label_sync/labels.md?plain=1#L438C10-L438C21)

This would then enable comments like

```
/(remove-)label tracked/no
/(remove-)label target/alpha
```

which would then apply or remove the custom labels. If you already know which labels you need here, I'd be happy to help set up a PR. However, you should also think about the users who can apply those, so we can also create a GH team for this circle.

See here for examples:
- [label plugin config](https://github.com/kubevirt/project-infra/blob/3d1e5fdcc90ce9e4439d654b1d79a4bef17b49f1/github/ci/prow-deploy/kustom/base/configs/current/plugins/plugins.yaml#L753)
- [label config](https://github.com/kubevirt/project-infra/blob/3d1e5fdcc90ce9e4439d654b1d79a4bef17b49f1/github/ci/prow-deploy/kustom/base/configs/current/labels/labels.yaml#L135)

Happy to help here if required.

**NOTE**
Acceptance of enhancement doesn't guarantee that the feature will land in the current or later release. The process is collaborative effort between contributor/s and Approvers. Features not landing to release branch prior to FF will need to file for excepion, see <TODO>

## Deadlines
The particular dealines are always changing based on the release and are publish <Link to repo>. The following deadlines are important for the VEP:
1. Enhancement Freeze - The deadline for this milestone is Alpha release of KubeVirt. See <TODO link to release repo>

> 2. Feature Freeze - This is tracked by each release <TODO link to release repo>

Reviewer 4: Maybe add another step before these two:
* VEP planning - at the beginning of every release cycle, each SIG would prioritize VEPs and decide which ones are being tracked for the upcoming release.

The VEP owner is responsible to update it as its development progresses, until it is fully mature (or deprecated).

**NOTE**
Acceptance of enhancement doesn't guarantee that the feature will land in the current or later release. The process is collaborative effort between contributor/s and Approvers. Features not landing to release branch prior to FF will be reverted based on their state (GA/Beta/Alpha, Off/On by default) that reflects how harmfull keeping the code is to the system.

> ## Approvers responsibility

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## SIGs' responsibility
```

1. After Feature Freeze, approvers needs to go over issue and perform the following checklist

   1. All PRs are merged into release branch
   2. Docs PR is merged (plan review ahead of release if only placeholder is opened)
   3. Verify that Enhancement was implemented and doesn't need any update
   4. Track any bugs
2. Weekly check-in on progress of Enhancement and its implementation

> 3. Coordinate sigs, reviewers and approvers in order to progress the Enhancement

Reviewer 4: My opinion is:
**The VEP owner responsibility**: coordinate between SIGs.
**SIG responsibility**: Prioritize VEP, decide if to track or not for the upcoming release, assign reviewers/approvers.

In other words, while each SIG has its own responsibilities, the VEP owner should be the one to do the actual coordination. As an example, if a VEP is owned by sig-compute but demands an ACK from sig-storage, the VEP owner should be joining the sig-storage meeting and ask for help.

   - [ ] Empower SIGs to take increased ownership while maintaining central prioritization.
3. **Future Considerations**:
   - [ ] Gradual reduction in centralized coordination as SIGs become self-sufficient.

## Exceptions
Exceptions are serving for any edge case that is not specified in this documment, by release team/repository or within KubeVirt repository. 
Typically an exeption would be asked to allow contributors to continue to working on VEP/PRs/code after the EF or FF respectivly.
Exceptions can be asked before actual EF/FF. 

> **How to ask for expection?**

Reviewer 4: nit, typo:
```suggestion
**How to ask for an expectation?**
```

Exception will be sent to kubevirt-dev mailing list, the following should not be missing:
1. Justification for exception
2. Additional time period that is required
3. In case of exception not being granted, what is the impact? (Thing about graduation, maturity of the feature, user impact, etc.)

> ## Common Questions

Reviewer 4: Maybe add:

**How to raise attention for my VEP?**
Every SIG has a recurring meeting. The VEP owner is encouraged to join the meeting and introduce the VEP to the community.

**What if my VEP relates to more than one SIG?**
VEPs can relate to multiple SIGs, but a single SIG should always own it. VEP owners can reach out to the SIG that seems most relevant for them. The SIG will either own the VEP or suggest that another SIG would own it.

**As a VEP owner, can I change implementation and only then update the VEP?**
While doing so is valid, it is discouraged. If an implementation was already merged but is ruled out as part of the VEP update this might lead to reverts, and the VEP owner should be aware of this risk. It is always recommended to merge a VEP update before starting to implement.
